general stuff:

intake of fiber( examples ), whole grain( examples ) and antioxidants( examples ), will attenuate the influence of unhealthy food items, explanation, references, case in our data.




sucrose-sacksum1 n.s. ....... not just added sugar, but also sugar intake from fruit and vegetables, confounding with healthy food items, case on our data





carbohydrates-kolhsum1......might be hard, since only if a person eats too much, the extra is turned into fat. But that is dependant on the rest of the intake as well as PA., case in our data





cholesterol-kolesum1 n.s. Soluble fiber also has cholesterol-lowering properties...(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodhyd.2011.02.026) & (Gunness & Gidley, 2010)





trans fat-TRANSsum1 it is supposed to be bad (https://doi.org/10.1016/0140-6736(93)90350-P ... for CHD here )





saturated fat-mfetsum1 (Food synergy: the key to a healthy diet* David R. Jacobs Jr) satfat from dairy inversely related to disease incidence, while satfat from meat was positively associated with disease 
(Dietary intake of saturated fat by food source and incident
cardiovascular disease: the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis)





disaccharides- DISAsum1(main sucrose and lactose)





other confounding notes:

macronutrients come into the body in a food matrix, so the bioaccessibility and bioavailabilty is different for each food item (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodhyd.2011.02.026)

source of confounding can be due to energy intake proportions, a persons diet, for example, a person who eats more sugar will eat less meat, so the obsereved negative association is from that

source of confounding can be in persons metabolism, if an unhealthy food item is eaten alone, the unhealthy macronutrients are absorbed differently then if eaten along with another food which could effect the bioaccessibility and bioavailabilty of that macronutrient. 

source of confounding can be from the macronutrient extraction, a particular macronutrient is extracted from food items that also contain another macronutrient, for example sugar and fibre




Food structure affects the rate and extent of digestion and the rate of absorption of nutrients. Independent of the form of food, the rate of stomach emptying and satiety have been correlated (Bergmann et al., 1992).


A true nutrient effect should be observed independent of
the food that it occurs in (the book, and other literature by d.r.jacobs)



Bioaccessibility refers to the release of the nutritive
compound from its food matrix (or a tablet, capsule, etc. for
a nutraceutical ingredient or a drug) into the digestive juices of the
gastrointestinal tract (Versantvoort, Oomen, Van de Kamp,
Rompelberg, & Sips, 2005). ........Once this compound has been
released, the proportion that is adsorbed and actually reaches the
systemic circulation represents its bioavailability. Some compo-
nents will pass through the digestive tract without being digested
and adsorbed, and these are evacuated...............Several factors, such as enzyme inhibition, fiber content, and
food matrix composition, can influence carbohydrate availability
through different mechanisms. Several mechanisms depend on
hindering or retarding starch hydrolysis. Glucose is only partially
released from starch, if at all, and does not contribute to glycemia..............The beneficial health-related properties of fiber is a very prac-
tical example of the role of the food matrix in the digestion process
and the resulting influence on the kinetics of glucose and choles-
terol metabolism......(Food matrix impact on macronutrients nutritional properties
Sylvie L. Turgeon * , Laurie-Eve Rioux)...Food processing, heat, mechanical or pressure treat-
ments




alter their physiological impacts


One aspect of food synergy may be a buffer effect: the effect
of a large intake of a particular nutrient may vary depending on
if it is taken in concentrated form or as part of a food matrix.....(Food synergy: an operational concept for understanding nutrition)


Another aspect of synergy may be nutrients that affect each
other’s absorption

Mulholland CA, Benford DJ. What is known about the safety of mul-
tivitamin-multimineral supplements for the generally healthy pop-
ulation? Theoretical basis for harm. Am J Clin Nutr 2007;85:318S–22S.









adjusting for fruit and vegetables does not seem to make much difference:

sugar_food R : 0.0196 , p-value : 2.13442e-05




Regarding the diet score, as you have read in Alaitz update, we had tried many different things and got all sorts of unexpected results.
We explored the sugar variable a bit more, but there are others and I am still not sure if we can say anything about sugar.
So sugar containing food items could be cornflakes, pancakes and vaffles, ice cream, sweets and chocolate, sugar, honey and jam, cookies, 
soft drink, sodas, juice(some of these were merged into one variable in the new questionnare)
partial spearmans rank correlation coefficient between bmi and those variables in grams, adjusting for basic covariates, like age, gender, etc. :

cornflakes  R : 0.016 , p-value : <2e-16
pancakes_vaffles  R : 0.026 , p-value : <2e-16
icecream  R : 0 , p-value : 0.979
sweets_chocolate  R : -0.002 , p-value : 0.596
sugar_honey_jam  R : -0.072 , p-value : <2e-16
cookies  R : -0.022 , p-value : <2e-16
softdrinks_sodas_juice  R : 0.039 , p-value : <2e-16
fruit  R : -0.009 , p-value : 0.051
vegetables  R : -0.002 , p-value : 0.67


combining all the sugar variables together and adjusting for fruit and vegetables:



We started with the guidlines, where in theory it would have been clear who has an unhealthy environment, and now endened up with a score which is completly dependant on the data
and the model of bmi and we cant say much about the score and what it really represents. First the data is macro and micro nutrients, combined from all food items in the questionnare, meaning
that the variation from nutrients from all sorts of food matrices and combinations are put together in one variable. In one way we get a lot of information, since we summarize all food items, but on the other hand
we loose information since we oversimplfy a very complex model. 
